Generally, for user authentication,
you only need the access token initially to source the user's details from the
userinfo endpoint and populate the principal object; however,
you might need to use the access token against the /userinfo
endpoint in your code at a later stage,
perhaps to see if the user details have changed or to use the
access token against other services or APIs,
for example,
hence it's important to understand that the access token also has an
expiry time which is independent of the session.
Your session could be active,
and the user logged into your application with an expired access token,
and when you attempt to use that token against,
say, the /userinfo endpoint or another service,
you end up with a 401 unauthorized; however,
the user is still logged into the application via the sessions.
Now, in this scenario, you could use a refresh token,
which in OAuth is a token that can be used against the authorization
server via the client to request a new access token.
Now, you're probably thinking, why not just extend the life of the access token?
Well, the benefit of this approach,
it allows the access token to actually have a shorter expiry as
access tokens are added in the headers of requests,
hence they're handled by third parties,
so there's a greater chance that they are leaked.
And the shorter the lifespan, the less damage an attack can do,
while the refresh token can have a longer expiry time as it's only ever used
against the authorization server to get a new access token,
so your application can secure it and have more confidence
that no malicious party has access to it.
In OAuth 2, for API access,
it also saves you having to request the resource owner to
reconsent each time the access token is required.
Now, to request a refresh token,
you simply put in the offline_access scope in your authorization request.
The resource owner will then have to consent to this.
Now, to get a new access token,
you can use a refresh token against the token endpoint,
along with the client ID and secret.
Spring Security will actually automatically refresh tokens for
you if the refresh token is present; however,
that's out of the scope of this course and a topic for future courses.
Now, if you're interested, you can check out my previous course,
which goes over accessing stateless microservices with access
tokens and deals with these kind of scenarios.
And in stateless clients or public clients that deal with access tokens,
it's generally not recommended to handle refresh tokens.
Now,
this is because you cannot securely store them in a public client and
public clients cannot handle client IDs in secret,
and without a client ID and secret,
the auth server can't authenticate the client and ensure its
giving the access token to the intended recipient.
And if a refresh token is leaked,
it can actually be worse than a password as you can always reset a password.
Okta, for example, will not issue refresh tokens to public clients. Next, let's wrap up.